# TLA+
* https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/tla/tla.html

> TLA+ is the **Temporal Logic of Actions**, for convenience, write as TLA+.
>
> TLA+ is a high-level language for modeling programs and systems–especially concurrent and distributed ones. It's based on the idea that the best way to describe things precisely is with simple mathematics. TLA+ and its tools are useful for eliminating fundamental design errors, which are hard to find and expensive to correct in code.

Actions:
* [vscode-tlaplus](./vscode-tlaplus/vscode-tlaplus.md)
* [Practical TLA+](./PTLAplus/PTLAplus.md)
* [Specify Systems](./SpecifySystems/SpecifySystems.md)
* [PlusCal P-Syntax](./PlusCal-p-syntax/PlusCal-p-syntax.md)

# Components

* SANY: the TLA+ parser
* TCL: the TLA+ model checker
* REPL: the TLA+ REPL
* pcal.trans: the PlusCal-to-TLA+ translator
  * [PlusCal](./PlusCal.md)
* tla2tex.TLA: the TLA+-to-LaTeX translator
* Toolbox: the IDE for TLA+
* TLA+ proof manager(tlapm): TLAPM translates TLA⁺ proof constructs into forms understood by an array of backend solvers & theorem provers, enabling machine-checked proofs of correctness for TLA⁺ specifications.

## Modules

### Sequences

> Specifying Systems Figure 18.1 - P341

```
Seq(S) \* S for set
Len(s) \* s for sequence
s \o t \* t for another sequence
Append(s, e) \* e for element
Head(s)
Tail(s)
SubSeq(s, m, n) \* m,n for integer
SelectSeq(s, Test) \* Test for boolean operator: Test(s[i])
```

### FiniteSets

> Specifying Systems Figure 18.2 - P.341

```
IsFiniteSet(S) \* S for set
Cardinality(S)
```

### Bags

```
IsABag(B) \* B for bag/multiset
BagToSet(B)
SetToBag(S) \* S for set
BagIn(e, B) \* e for element
EmptyBag
CopiesIn(e, B)
B1 (+) B2
B1 (-) B2
BagUnion(S) \* S for set of bags
B1 \sqsubseteq B2
SubBag(B)
BagOfAll(F(_), B) \* F for function
BagCardinality(B)
```

### Numbers: Naturals, Integers, Reals

> Specifying Systems Figure 18.6 - P.348, Figure 18.7 - P.348, Figure 18.8 - P.348

```
\* Naturals
Nat
a + b \* a,b for naturals
a - b
a * b
a^b
a <= b
a >= b
a < b
a > b
a..b
a \div b
a % b

\* Integers
Int
*. a \* unary -

\* Reals
Real
a/b
Infinity
```

### TLC

> Specifying Systems P.248

```
Print(out, val)
Assert(val, out)
JavaTime

d :> e
f @@ g
Permutations(S)
SortSeq(s, _ \prec _)
```

# Tools
* TLA+ Toolbox
* vscode-tlaplus

Toolbox - TLC Configuration - Configurations in 'Model Overview'

Model description
* Additional Spec Options
  * Additional Definitions
    * Definitions required for the model checking, in addition to the definitions in the specification module.
  * Definition Override
    * Directs TLC to use alternate definitions for operators.
  * Model Values
    * An additional set of model values.
  * Action Constraint
    * A formula restricting a transition if its evaluation is not satisfied.
  * State Constraint
    * A formula restricting the possible states by a state predicate.

What is the behavior spec?
* Initial predicate and next-state relation
  * Init
  * Next
* Temporal formula
* No behavior spec: to test expressions without running anything.

What is the model?
* specify the values of the declared constants.

What to check?
* Deadlock
* Invariants
  * formulas true in every reachable state, to place safety invariants
* Properties
  * temporal formulas true for every possible behavior, to place liveness properties.
* Additional TLC Options
  * Configuration
    * Number of worker threads
    * Fraction of physical memoery allocated to TLC
    * Log base 2 of number of disk storage files
  * Checking Mode
    * Post Condition
    * Alias
    * Model-checking mode View
            - Depth-first Depth
    * Simulation mode
            - Maximum length of the traces
            - Maximum length of each trace
            - Seed
            - Aril
  * Features
    * Recover from checkpoint
    * Checkpoint ID
    * Profiling
            - On, Off, Action enablement
    * Visualize state graph after completion of model checking
  * Parameters
    * Verify temporal properties upon termination only
    * Fingerprint seed index
    * Cardinality of largest enumerable set
    * JVM arguments
    * TLC command line parameters

How to run?: do runtime optimizations to make TLC faster.
* System resources dedicated to TLC
* Tune these parameters and set defaults
* Evaluate Constant Expressions - Model Checking Results
  * General
  * Statistics
    * State space progress
    * Sub-actions of next-state
  * Evaluate Constant Expression
    * Expression
    * Value
  * User Output
    * TLC output generated by evaluating Print and PrintT expressions.
  * Progress Output

# Applications

MongoDB
* [Fixing a MongoDB Replication Protocol Bug with TLA+](http://conf.tlapl.us/2019/williamschultz/) 2019
* [Code](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo/tree/master/src/mongo/tla_plus)

ZooKeeper
* [Verifying Zookeeper based on Model-Based runtime Trace-Checking using TLA+](https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.1145/3558819.3558822)

# See Also
